In this demo, I'll show you how the
Raft Consensus Algorithm works that the ETCD is using
to make sure the data is stored in a reliable way
while still having a multiple node systems
or a distributed system.
This is the Raft Consensus Algorithm.
And this URL is raft.github.com,
so it's provided by Raft itself.
And Raft is a consensus algorithm that is designed
to be easy to understand.
So I will explain you in this lecture
a little bit more about how the
Raft Consensus Algorithm works.
It is equivalent to Paxos.
If you're familiar with Paxos then Raft also
provides the same fault-tolerance and performance.
So what is consensus?
Consensus is a fundamental problem in
fault-tolerant distributed systems.
Consensus involves multiple servers,
so they're multiple EDC servers, agreeing on values.
So let's say you have a three node system ETCD.
You set a new kerbenetes object,
how can it agree that this is the object that we do save?
What if there is a node failure?
How are the nodes going to agree on this specific value
and not on an older value or maybe even a newer value?
Once they reach a decision on a value,
then that decision is final and
is persisted to ETCD basically.
Typically consensus algorithms make progress when
any majority of their servers are available.
This is the quorom I was talking about, for example,
a cluster of 5 can continue to operate
with 2 servers it fail.
So she can still reach a quorom
so they'll then be able to still reach consensus
and still be able to function.
You have Raft visualization right here and
this is how I am then going to
explain the basic of this algorithm.
So this can be done in your ETCD cluster and
in your ETCD cluster you can have some values
in kubernetes node components objects.
And the first thing that will happen when you start
your ETCD cluster, here we have five nodes, is that
they need to pick a leader.
So first thing that's going to happen is
they're going to pick a leader
and then the leader is going to make rites.
And you'll connect an object for example,
and then they need to agree in a quorom,
at least three of those five nodes need to agree
that this is the rite they're going to persist.
So let's press this start button, these are the seconds
and this the speed.
So I'm just going to start it and then we'll see
that the leader is going to be like that.
So I'll start up, they would all have some kind of
timer, we'll wait between a certain amount of
milliseconds but that time of wait is randomized,
so one of them will be first.
We should already be able to see it right here,
it's probably going to be S2.
That is going to be the first one sending out
messages, it wants to be elected as a leader and then
the other ones can vote.
So then it might get all the votes because
none of the other ones are going to reach zero
when this S2 node is going to be sending out its messages.
So then, everyone's going to vote
and then S2 should be leader.
So let's see that what I'm saying is correct.
I'm going to start now.
So S2 is going to go to zero first, have a look at that S2.
And S2 is going to send out messages:
"Please elect me as a leader of your cluster."
See those messages arrived and then those other nodes
are then electing S2 as a leader,
because S2 was just the first one.
And S2 is now a leader.
So if you click on S2...
State: leader.
If you click on S1, state: follower.
So we all have followers now and S2 is the leader,
that's where the rites will go to.
S2 will always send out heartbeats to the other nodes
and the other nodes will always then respond to that.
That way they know that the leader is still active,
is still working.
So here are the replies and then it'll wait a little bit
and then it will send out heartbeats and then
it will always get a response.
You can also see that there is a timer on still
because if the leader doesn't send these heartbeats
then they will consider that this leader node is gone,
and then they will start a re-election process.
So let's try that now.
Let's say, that we stop this node.
And let's start again.
So then they're going to run out-
the timer is going to run out.
S3 then sends out...
because there was a time out.
S2 didn't send heartbeats so S3 is now going to
send to all of them nodes that it wants to be elected,
and "please like me," and then the other nodes send a reply.
So now, S3 is the leader.
And now it will be S3
that send out heartbeats.
And you see it also sends heartbeats to S2,
but S2 is not responding.
Only when we resume S2.
Then...
it will start sending replies again.
So let's say we didn't do it right
then they will have to reach a consensus.
So we're going to do a request.
Request comes from the leader.
Gonna start again.
And then what's going to happen is...
S3 sent out...
the heartbeat also with
this update of information, three.
And all the other nodes will also update.
But the rite will only be persisted
when there's a quorom reached.
So only when two other nodes are going to say,
"I agree on the rite," then the rite will be persisted.
Because we have enough replies from each quorom
so three is now written to the log.
In kerbenetes this three will then be an object
because an object comes in, then the object
is sent to all the nodes, so then it replies back.
And then when we have reached a quorom
then the rite is persisted.
So now the rite is persisted then we can have new object.
There are some details that I didn't mention.
There is a paper that you can read about this
Raft algorithm if you want to know all details.
So let's now see what happens if you do a rite
if three nodes fail.
So...
Let's stop this one,
and this one,
and this one.
So now we only have two nodes...
in our cluster.
As I try to do a rite...
We're trying to rite number three...
But there's no quorom, the other nodes are not responding.
So we can see S4 wants to rite number three in second slot.
But it cannot acknowledge that number three
needs to be written because we don't have quorom.
Let's resume this one.
Okay, this one also has number three.
Quorom has reached and now three has been written.
So if we now resume...
two and five,
then they will also get this information.
There you go.
And now...
all the
nodes...
have the same information
because we have reached a quorom.
So if there's a majority of the nodes not working,
we won't be able to rite to our ETCD cluster.
Only when they are enough nodes we can form a quorom,
we can rite to our cluster.
(stutters)
That make sure that we have always the correct information
in our cluster cause otherwise one part of the cluster
could have one part of the information and the other part
could have another- could have other information.
That's what you want to avoid.
You want to avoid that we have a brain split and
two parts of our nodes with different information.
So that's why we have this quorom.
So that's it for the rest of visualization.
I hope this made you understand ETCD a little bit better,
and how it actually rites...
the kerbenetes object to its cluster.